Be recording.
Yeah, Django is also a good movie, so uh.
Before we started,
I already prepared a, uh. Uh.
some quiz kind of quiz just
to make sure that. I mean we are.
Uh, I mean have it same understanding of
the words that I'm using in the class.
So I have a very small quiz, uh,
it's not a quiz. Just double check.
So I put the link in the chat box.
So please open this link.
And you'll see a question.
So I'm going to show the question here.
And also, uh. Let's see, uh,
what is the answer for this question?
So let's just talk whenever you are ready.
Uh, and also I have to put the.
Answers here. Just to see.
What are the answers?
Basically, here we want to see that a.
Is it possible to run a C program
that is built in a Mac system?
To run it again on Intel or
AMD or other computer systems.
So we have 49 votes and we have
96 students in the class. So I'll
wait for the others to participate.
The link is in the chat box. Jenn, who?
Oh thank you Seth yeah.
So.
As we already said,
when we write a C program,
we compile to assembly and
then by assembler we converted
to opcode of the processor.
And because the processor made
by different manufacturers have
different opcodes and different
instructions as a result of the OP
code of the program on one system,
for instance in match cannot be
executed in another, I mean system.
For instance on Intel.
Or if you I mean compile your
program in opcode of an Intel,
it cannot be run on AMD system
processor made by AMD company and etc.
So let's see the answer.
So the answer is no, most of you said yes.
And, uh, we have to see.
Wow, what was the reason that you
put the yes? Why do you think that?
I mean, if you write a C program for,
I mean and build it on a Mac system,
you can run the file on another system.
Yes, I mean Max system.
Any any processor made by
the Apple Company, yeah.
I meant I mean by Mac.
I meant, I mean any processing
made by the apple.
So let's go to the next question.
So the next question is that now that
we cannot run a C program which is
already built for the Mac processor.
How can we fix the problem now I have
the executable file of the program and
now I want to run it on another system.
For instance on IBM.
How can we fix the problem?
Should I rewrite the whole program again?
For instance, I have to start,
I mean copy paste this C code lines
again and then build it again on
a new system or I have to just?
Get the old C program and then
just recompile the program.
But based on the assembler on
the new system for instance.
If I already have the C program
which is built on a Mac system,
I'd give the same C program.
And then I find the assembler for
IBM and then assemble the assembly
lines of the C program for the
IBM and make it opcode for IBM.
So which one is correct?
So let's see.
OK, luckily most of you actually
put the correct answer.
And now let's go to the next question.
So here we say that.
Is it possible to claim that a C
program can be executed on any system?
So for instance,
you write this C program that does,
for instance, our addition of two
large number and then you claim that.
This program can be executed on any
system on a Mac system on a Windows
based Intel processor or on a I mean
AMD build processor or AMD, IBM and etc.
So let's see we have 71.
You have 100 students in the class.
Still, some of these students.
So let's see what is the answer.
I think the answer is both yes and no.
So for the yes.
Hot, basically you could simply say that
I find the assembler for the new system,
and then I recompile and then reassemble
the C program in the new system.
So the answer is yes.
But sometimes you can say that no,
because there would be no
assembler for your new system.
What if there is no assembler
for the IBM processor?
Uh, for the I mean C programs.
What if there is no?
I mean, uh, assembler in his system?
As you've already,
I mean correctly said said most of
the processors has an assembler
because if there is no assembler,
no program can be.
I mean written for that processor.
But in very rare cases,
you can say that a processor is able
to just run the opcodes and there
is no assembly for that processor.
So in computer architecture two,
you will see some processors that
they can only run opcodes and there
is no assembly for assembler for them.
So the next question is this.
Oh, I already answered this question,
so you know what is the answer.
So when we when we are able
to claim that the C program
can be executed on any system.
Never or if there is an assembler for.
A system, so I already
answered this question,
so if you find an assembler for processor,
you can claim that that C program
can be compiled to assembly language
and then can be assembled to the
assembly of that processor to
the opcode of that process. So.
Let's continue with the
remaining part of the course.
So. These questions are,
I mean discussed in details
in this week's assignments.
So I already released the assignments,
the lecture assignment.
You can find the lecture
assignment at this address.
The lecture, uh,
the folder for the this week's,
uh, I mean lecture,
and then this is the assignment.
And also we released the latter Simon,
so the lab started this week,
so you can find the lab assignment at
this location of the blackboard and, uh.
Monday we have the online labs.
We have also on campus labs based on the
lab that you registered you attend the lab.
And you asked for help to do their labs so.
In this lab we basically once you too. Uh.
It will prepare a working environment.
Basically whether you install
a fresh copy of Linux.
Nothing exactly.
We could say that Unix based
or Unix like operating system
on your own computer or you can
connect to the CS dot U Windsor.
Dot CA if you're on campus,
there is no need for VPN.
You have to simply just connect with
this machine and provides you a Unix like
or Unix based based operating system.
If you are outside the campus,
you have to use VPN.
I put the links in the lab manual so
you know how to install that app to
connect to the VPN and then connect
to this server to just write a simple
hello world program and compile it
in Linux in a Unix environment.
And uh, next Wednesday.
At 4:00 AM,
this is the deadline for your
submission and then the following
Monday you are going to receive your marks.
So any question.
So we have a question here.
Victor says that are there are
system specific libraries that
could be included that may not
translate right on translate.
OK, so in some cases it
might have been rewritten.
Correct, actually there are some
libraries that they already
opcode for an operating system,
but in order to be runnable
in another system,
you have to find the source,
rebuild the whole source for
the new processor.
Basically you have to compile it and
assemble it again for a new processor.
Uh, we have a says that yes, actually,
the uh. At the NOMACHINE is basically
provides you a virtual machine as a
Unix environment for you. Yes, yeah.
So we already said that when we
talk about Unix, we mainly talk
about its core or its kernel.
So the kernel of any operating
system specific to the Unix has
main parts that provide services
to the application level programs.
These main parts are File Manager.
One of them, also known as file system.
We said that this part of the kernel
provides access to the IO devices.
For instance hard disk drive,
printer, keyboard and etc.
The next important part
is the memory manager.
Basically, the memory manager provides
an illusion that a program can have
unlimited infinite memory space.
So the program assumes that there
is a infinite amount of memory.
However, we know that the computer
system has a limited memory,
so the way that the kernel runs a
program is by paging page by page,
so the program doesn't know that
there is a limited amount of memory,
but because of the paging by
the memory manager of a kernel.
The next important part is the process
manager, and we said that process
manager as a main responsibility to
make a program runnable how by loading
the opcode of a program inside the
memory and attach and make it ready
for the processor to fetch the op code
of the program and execute them. Also,
another task of the process manager is this.
If we have only seen one single processor
and multiple processes inside the memory,
how can we share this single
processor between multiple processes?
So we have process ES and behalf processor.
That's why they call it process
and process it.
So we have one single process
processor and multiple processes.
So how can we share this between multiple?
I mean processes this is
called multi process execution?
Or is scheduling?
We'll discuss it in detail later.
Another important part is
the network manager.
The main duty of this part is
that provide access to resources
of other computer systems outside
our own computer system.
So for instance,
if you have our computer with the processor.
CPU and also memory.
Is it possible for a program
inside this machine to access the?
Memory.
Of another system,
or the CPU or processor of another system.
This is possible through the
network manager of a kernel.
We later discuss how we can
write a program that asked for
such a service from the kernel.
And the last important part
is the device manager.
Basically any device in order to be
recognized A and provide services on
top of that to the application level.
Program should be registered by the kernel.
So if you have a keyboard but you are,
I mean it's not registered to the kernel.
Other programs cannot access the keyboard.
So all the devices are devices,
even the processor,
even the memory,
even the clock of the system.
All these devices should be
registered to the kernel.
Then the kernel can provide service
to these devices to the application
level programs to other programs.
So these are the main
important part of the kernel.
In next few weeks we are going to
discuss each part of the kernel.
But the first question is that
the kernel itself is a program.
Written in what language?
What was the language of the Linux?
I mean, in what language Linux was written?
Anybody? Correct initially was in assembly,
but later he said that,
uh Dennis Ritchie and can Thompson,
providing new hire language C language
and they re written the units by the sea,
so it is already in C and then compile it
to assembly and then assemble into opcodes.
So it is already in opcodes.
But this little program is not a process
we have to load it into the memory
space of the system in order to make it
process and executed by the processor.
So how can we do that?
So the way we do this is very
similar to wearing a shoe,
so when you wear a boots because
wearing a boot is very difficult.
So usually a boot has a part called
Bootstrap, so it's a strap attached to the.
Boots and then you just by helping from
the bootstrap you try to wear a shoe boot.
So the same word is actually borrowed for.
A A system to where the kernel
or basically to load the kernel.
We call it booting up or
bootstrapping the kernel.
So. In the next few slides,
I'm going to explain how a kernel
actually becomes a process.
Or the Buddhist trapping of the A Colonel.
So before that I have to explain.
A little bit about, uh,
how the processor executes
the opcodes inside the memory.
You you learn about the details in
the computer architecture course 2.
Uh, and also at the end of
the computer architecture one.
But here we need just a very
brief introduction.
So basically,
inside the processor there are
some memory units inside the
processor which we call it a.
Usually we call them registers.
These are just arrays of memory units.
Each one is able to store a binary number,
either zero or one.
For instance, we have 0010 and etc.
We call them registers.
These registers inside the
processor has a page.
Each one has a main duty or specific duty.
An important one is called
IP or instruction pointer.
Sometimes they call it PROS,
program counter or PC.
So as you see,
the name implies the duty this
register in have the value or the
address of the opcode that is going
to be executed by the processor.
So what the processor does is that it
first looks at the value of the IP
which includes the address of the opcode.
So this is called a kind of fetch.
Or bringing the opcodes at this
address inside the processor.
So at that location. It asked
the processor ask the bus.
To fetch the opcode at the address
of the IP inside the processor.
And then automatically
increase the value of IP by 1.
So IP plus plus or plus one.
So the the opcode at the previous
address goes to the register processor.
Ready to be executed,
but it's not executed yet.
And then the IP automatically incremented
by one and now execute the OP.
The opcode that is previously
previously is inside the processor.
So the next when this opcode
executed successfully.
The cycle goes for another opcode.
So again, the processor looks
at the value inside the IP.
This is an address to the current opcode,
so it goes here,
fetches the opcode inside the processor.
By using the boss.
And then increment the IP by one
value so the correct address of
the IP points to the next opcode
and then execute the OP code that
is already inside the processor.
And this process goes forever as
long as the computer has a power.
So as you can see here.
This is the simple but the main
important task of the processor fetch,
increment, execute, batch,
increment, execute.
So in order just to make sure
that you understand this cycle,
here is a question.
What happens when we have this
situation in a computer system?
The current value of the IP is 0000.
And inside the memory we have two opcodes,
one opcode.
Basically I didn't put the actual opcodes,
it's a binary series.
But basically it means that put the value
of IP equal to zero and then the next opcode,
which is it,
random opcodes etc.
So my question from you is that what happens
in this scenario or in this situation?
So in order again,
you can go to the same.
Uh,
uh link and let me go to the yeah.
So here is the question.
So in this situation,
what happens to this system?
So let me just. Put it
here and then put it here.
What is the answer?
You can go to the same link
and answer this one. So I put
the link again in the chat box.
Whether the processor stops and reason alarm,
or whether the processor does
normally execute this command and
goes to the next one and then execute
this one and then go to the next
one and then go to the next one.
Or the processor blindly loops
forever on the same opcode or
you have no idea about this.
So we have 62 participants,
but there are more than hundred
student, the class. Wake up guys.
This is an important cycle
in the computer system, so.
So let's see, uh? The answer.
So the answer is just 16%,
which is a little below.
Uh, most of you said that the processor
executes the next opcode sequentially.
So let's explain what happens here. So.
At first the processor looks at the value
of the IP register and sees this address.
Then it asks the bus to fetch
the opcode at this address, so.
This is the address,
so it asks the bus to fetch this.
Opcode inside the processor.
So this opcode, which is IP equal to 0000,
goes inside the processor.
The next is automatically
increments the value of the IP,
so the value of IP plus one becomes 0001.
So now the IP.
Direct to the next outcome.
And then it executes the process.
I mean this opcode which is
already in the processor.
So when the processor executes this.
It should put the zero value inside
the IP register so the IP register
comes back to the value 0000.
So one cycle of the execution,
the next cycle again, processor looks
at the value of the IP, which is 000.
Ask the past to fetch the opcode at
this address so it goes again to the.
This address fetches the same opcode.
And then increment the IP by
one so it becomes 0001 and then
it executes this opcode.
So it began, the IP is.
Can become 0000.
So the next round,
the same opcode as you can see here.
The processor loops forever,
executing the same opcode.
You see how manipulating the value of IP?
Keeps the control of the processor,
whether it keeps it in one place
or it by changing the value of IP.
You can force the processor to jump
in other locations of the memory.
I'll explain shortly what is the?
I mean, it's still it's alleged.
I mean, it's still it's
illegal cycle in a processor.
Sometimes we need to do this sometimes,
but we need to do other opcodes.
So I'll explain in few slots.
So this scenario is called as you see here,
busy waiting.
So basically we want the processor.
Be busy but without any progress.
Just wait by making in
making the processor busy.
Sometimes we need to keep
the processors someplace,
and then we wait for some event to
jump to another opcode and execute that
part of the program, but sometimes.
If there is no event,
we just want the processor stay at
the same position in the memory.
It is very similar to the I
mean running on the treadmill,
but reaching nowhere.
Sometimes we do this.
Also, it's called busy looping or spinning.
And this is a famous status
in a convenience system.
And by the way, if you are looking for
another movie but not for your weekend,
you can go to this movie.
It's a scene by a in the movie, Loveless.
By this director Andrade Zagnut self.
This director is my most favorite director.
And, uh, it it has four or five movies.
And, uh, but this movie is very dark,
very dark and very bitter.
So I won't suggest this to watch this
movie as if you want to entertain.
But in terms of cinematography and scenery,
it is a very good movie. Anyways,
this is another a movie recommendation.
So now we know that how the.
A processor.
Do the execution cycle fetch,
increment, execute?
And sometimes by the opcode we can
keep the processor in one place.
So now let's go to the real situation.
What if what happens when we turn on the
computer before turning on the computer?
The computer is off, meaning that
there is no power to the computer.
So when there is no power,
all the circuits of the
computer system are in the zero.
Voltage is so zero voltage is zero.
Voltage means that.
Zero binary value.
So zero in a binary numbering system.
Which may basically means that all
the registers of the processor
are at the value 0.
And all the memory locations are at
the value 0 because there is no power.
So when you turn on the computer.
Now the processor is on and starts
doing the execution cycle forever.
So what happens is that it looks at
the address of the opcode as the
IP address at the iPad register,
so it sees the value 0.
It goes to the address of zero and
memory and ask the bus to fetch
the opcode at this location and
bring it inside the processor.
And then what is next?
The next is increment the value of IP by one.
So the value of IP becomes 0001.
And then it wants to execute the opcode
that is already inside the processor.
But we know that processors with the
opcode of all zero is not invalid opcode,
so it raises an alarm.
The system is start beeping.
And it stops.
So it's crashed to the system or
it's kind of a halt because it
halts the system actually halts.
So this is the normal.
I mean,
execution of the computer system halting.
But we have to get away with this situation.
So.
Again,
we are trying to load the kernel
so first we understood how
the processor works next.
Is that what happens when we turn
on the computer so it halts?
Now we need help in order to load the kernel.
The help comes from a program called bias.
Bias is an acronym for Basic Input.
Output system is not a bias,
so this is not a.
It's not a bias or it
discriminating against something.
It's a BIOS or basic input output system.
So what is this?
This is a program,
so when we say it's a program,
it means that it is written
by a programming language.
It could be C.
It could be any other programming languages,
and it's already compiled to assembly.
And it's already assembled into opcodes,
so bias is a programming up codes.
However,
this program is written by the manufacturers.
For instance,
the IBM, Intel,
AMD,
or Apple write this program and then
it puts the program inside it chip.
Inside the main board so it is hard coded
inside your system inside the main board.
One of these chips are the buyers.
But what is this program?
So if you look closely inside
the chip of your main board,
you can identify the BIOS chip,
so it's a program inside it, I mean.
Electrical circuit.
So what it does is that it
provides a way to Buddhist rap.
It's with this traffic kernel.
It actually acts like a bootstrap of a boot.
So initially when you turn on the computer.
The system or the main board or
the I mean the whole computer
system before letting the
processor is start execution cycle.
The whole program of virus
goes inside the memory.
So, assuming the BIOS has only three opcodes,
so the three opcodes goes to any available
space inside the memory initially,
the memory is empty,
so it can go anywhere inside the memory.
Usually at the first address,
because the first address is
already inside the IP register.
Now the processor is starting the
execution cycle so the processor
looks at the value of the
IP0000. It goes to this location of
the memory and then ask the pause to
fetch this opcode inside the processor.
And then it increments the IP by one.
So the value of the IP
register becomes 00001.
And then execute this occur.
This opcode actually is a checking,
meaning that it checks whether the
system has the essential hardware parts.
For instance, it has a CPU.
It has a memory, it has a keyboard
or essential parts of the system.
If any of these parts are
missing from a system,
it starts beeping or halting As for instance,
if there is no memory or if there is
a problem with part of the memory.
So then it raises an alarm
and it starts beeping.
You can try it at home.
For instance you remove your CPU from
your main board and turn on the computer.
The bias loads checks and it raises
an alarm at the start beeping,
meaning that there is no CPU on the system.
So after checking and everything is fine,
it it does another execution cycle
so it goes to the value of the IP
which is already incremented by 1.
So this opcode is going to be fetched,
the processor which is.
Load MBR, what is this?
NPR, again, it's a piece of program,
so it's a program.
What type of program I'll explain later,
but assuming it's just a program like a BIOS.
But these opcodes?
Asked to load this piece of
program inside the memory.
So when the value so the processor
fetches this opcode increments
the value of the IP by one,
so now it becomes 00010 which is.
The number 2 in binary system.
And then execute this.
Which basically load this piece of program.
Where is this?
The bias knows?
How you can manipulate this location?
You have to manipulate this program.
This program knows where is the MBR.
It loads the MBR by executing this opcode.
So the MBR goes to any available
space inside the memory.
And then this is a very important opcode.
And then the next opcode is setting
the IP the instruction pointer
register to the address of NBR.
Meaning that give the control
of the processor to the.
First up code of MBR.
So by successful execution of this opcode.
The processor goes to the program MBR,
but what is MBR?
MBR is called master boot record.
Master Boot Record is a
record of information that has
the address of the kernel.
So the NPR, the first opcode of the NPR.
Knows where is the Colonel.
Whether the Colonel is in the USB,
whether the kernel is inside Air,
CD, ROM in inside the CD.
Whether the USA the Colonel is on a
heart destroyed or any SSD drive,
the NVR knows where is the Colonel.
So the first.
Upgrade of the MBR again the processor.
Uh. After the buyers give the
address of the NBR to the IP,
the IP value becomes the address of the MBR.
So now the processor looks at
the address inside the IP,
which is here fetches this opcode
from the MBR inside the processor
and then it increments the IP by one,
which now, because for instance
an address asks something,
so it becomes one.
A step further and then it
executes this. By executing this,
the kernel loads inside the memory.
And the next opcode,
which is very important,
is that setting the IP to the
first address of the kernel.
So this opcode goes the processor and.
Executed by executing this opcode,
the IP register becomes the
address of the kernel, which is,
for instance this address. So.
Then the value of IP becomes this address.
And the kernel starts fetching
the OP code of the current.
The kernel can now play with
the IP and keep the processor
inside the kernel. Forever.
And this is the whole summer.
So first of all, you turn on your computer.
After you turn on your computer, the buyers.
Is going to be located inside the
memory and then the CPU jumps to the
first OP code of the bias and the bias?
Does the some checking.
It's called power on self test,
meaning that post usually called post.
Everything is fine or the essential
part of the hardware is available,
otherwise it holds.
If everything is well,
it goes to loading the
MBR master boot record.
Usually they massive would record is in
the first sector of the hard disk drive.
It can be anywhere else ranks
as the first sector of a city.
You can change the MBR to point
to any part of the system,
because the MBR knows where is the kernel.
And then after loading the MBR,
MBR knows where the kernel and the OP
code inside the MBR loads the kernel.
And this is the final state.
The whole part of the kernel resides
inside the memory ready to provide
service to the other programs.
And this is the way we show it.
I honestly I like this portrait better
because this is the actual way that
happens inside the computer system.
The kernel inside the memory,
but sometimes in a book or
in other textbooks,
we can see that they show it like this.
So this is the computer
wrapped by the kernel.
Meaning that now the kernel has
the control of everything and
keeps the processor inside itself.
Or sometimes you can see it like this
so the machine or system on top of the
machine you have the kernel of the
Unix or any other operating system
to control the access to the machine.
Any questions?
So we have a lot of questions
in the chat box. So.
Victor asks a I'm a bit confused.
I thought it executed current code.
Increment the IP which is
the code at the new address,
then execute them.
Set because the, uh,
so let's back to the this question.
Yeah here. Because the OP
code itself sets the IP.
So although you already
incremented the IP by 1.
But after that the processor
executes your opcode, which you set,
sets the IP again to 0.
So again, it resets to zero and
then goes to the previous address.
That's why because we
intentionally manipulate the
IP address by our own program.
So we have another question
with the Sigma shell.
Does value of IP always start at zero?
Ah, this is good question.
This is very simplified version,
but honestly no.
I mean usually the manufacturers
are sets this value.
It could be any place inside the memory,
but it is fixed by the manufacturer.
The manufacturer knows that where
to load the buyers and then where
to point the IP address of the
processor to execute the buyers.
But this is simplified version.
Uh, issue asks uh, something I messed
around with as a child. That's.
OK, I'm not sure I understand your question.
Is the question or not? It's red.
Ethan as an older system there
were two chips right at north.
Even the current even the current
system has two chips, North and South,
but those are not the buyers and those
are for different controlling mechanism.
You read more about them
in the computer to two.
Even not in that course.
It's kind of advanced electrical course.
You have to take the administrator
course to know what is this North
and South chips inside the member.
Uh. Oldies by assembly cannot are loaded
in a continuous blocks of memory.
Oh, we have no, not really.
As I said, let me go back in this year.
As you can see here, the any available
space inside the memory can have the
buyers so it can be for instance,
the buyers start at zero and as you
can see here, the MBR is in any other
places available inside the memory.
But those opcodes for the same program.
Should be together.
But I mean I'm saying this, uh,
sometimes, because of the paging,
even the kernel or even the MBR
could be in different places in
some in memory that's complicated,
but for us we can assume that all
the MBR are in same places together.
All the buyers are together,
and all difference kernel all the
parts of the kernel altogether.
But again, these are not just one opcode.
These are not, I mean thousands of opcodes,
so you shouldn't assume that just after
this address we have the next manager.
So for instance in this part you may have
one million opcodes for just device manager,
1,000,000 opcode for just memory manager.
For this course we can assume that all
these managers are are in together
in some place inside the memory,
but again, even the kernel can be paged.
And it's rad.
OK. So Dillon asks so they
bias MBR to the kernel.
Why can't we go straight from the
bias to the kernel? And why doesn't
the bias load the kernel address?
Oh, good question, good question.
Uh. Dylan asks that why instead
of just loading the NPR and then
give the control to the MBR and
the envelopes to Colonel, why not?
The biased knows the address
the the location of the kernel
and loads the kernel right away
without need for the MBR. Uh.
You have to think about the manufacturers
and those that build the kernels.
So as soon enough.
Imagine that you put the
whole units inside your USB.
So.
Whether I mean if,
for instance you have USB here.
And then, uh. This buyers should know,
for instance, this is the kernel.
The whole kernel in OPKO.
And, uh, this is the, uh.
For instance of.
I have to explain this way.
This should be.
Recognize the USB that you have.
The kernel should be recognized by the
system such that you have to find a
way to introduce where is this USB.
Indie bias, so the buyers should
know where is the Colonel in
order to find the kernel should
know what are the device devices
and which device has the kernel.
So in order I mean you have
to find a way to do this.
So. Bye.
There is a something called buyers set up.
When you turn on your computer,
you can go to this setup and in
the in the setup you have the
list of all the hard work that are
installed inside the computer.
For instance,
you have the USB's that are installed.
You have this CD ROM that are installed.
You have the hard,
distracted or installed etc.
So the buyers.
Can be cell, I mean can be set to
find the kernel in what devices.
However, inside each device.
You may have the kernel,
for instance in the middle of your USB,
not in the first location after your USB.
Or, for instance, you have a CD.
And your kernel is just in
this part of this CD ROM CD.
But the first address of your city is here.
So.
The buyers,
if you say to this bias that
varies in what device you have,
the kernel,
you can simply say that OK buyers.
For instance,
you're my kernel is inside the city.
But where is inside the city?
The buyers only recognized the
first location of the city,
which is master boot record for the city.
In this first location,
you can have the address of the kernel.
That's why we needed MBR or massive
would record for any devices because
your kernel is not necessarily at
the first location of the device.
That you, I mean you store.
There were Colonel,
it could be in for instance in any
other places of your city or your USB.
But the buyers only recognize
the first location of the device.
So then you have to put the
address of your kernel inside the
device in the first location.
That's why it's called envy
or master boot record.
Master Boot record is the first location
of any devices that can restore something.
For CD, ROM is the first sector
for the hard disk drive.
Again is the first sector
of the frontage drive.
Which usually directs to the
actual location of the kernel.
Next chance, Dylan.
That's why we need the MBR.
Yeah, the buyers only recognized
the hardware and the first location
of the device, but it cannot find
inside the device weighs the kernel.
The NPR directs the biased to the
damn location of the character, yeah?
So we have nonvolatile form of
memory contains its own MBR.
Ah, I can say yes,
but again I mean all these.
My answers are just for simplicity.
I mean, uh, the model system.
In general, they act like this,
but in modern system you may
find some differences, but.
In general, yes, any device has a
first location master boot record.
In a non volatile and persistent
device that directs to the
location of the kernel, yeah.
So let's continue, Oh my goodness,
we have OK. So now that we have
the kernel inside the memory.
Uh, let's see what happens when you do,
I mean, some action with this system.
For instance, you press a key on a keyboard,
or you attach a USB to your device,
or you click on a mouse.
Because the kernel controls everything
and provide access to these devices
to the programs to other programs.
Application level programs.
So now we have to discuss when you press
a key, how the kernel handles this.
Keep this keystroke to other programs.
Again, you can apply the
whole procedure for any other,
I mean activity with devices
for other programs.
So we have kernel inside the memory.
And the kernel keeps the
processor busy waiting in itself,
and now suddenly you press a key
on a keyboard.
For instance,
you press the character Jeep.
So when you press a click on the
mouse or a keyboard, you basically
attaching two circuits to each other.
So as a result, you are providing a signal
electrical signal or electrical shock.
So this is very simple version of.
I mean this signal.
So by this shock,
the system knows that something happened.
This shock goes whether I mean
goes against him.
For simplicity goes to the processor.
So suddenly the processor receives
electrical shock or electrical signal.
So. Kernel has device manager to
manage is the events funded devices.
For instance, for a keyboard it has a
specific part of the kernel just to handle
any shock or any event from the keyboard.
Assuming that this part of the kernel
is in this address of the memory.
Now the processor knows there is
electrical shock from a device.
The processor should give the control
to the keyboard part of the kernel
because the kernel has some opcodes.
To manage this shock or this signal.
But we know that the kernel has the
control of the processor by controlling
the IP of the processor, how?
The processor jumps to this
part of the kernel.
Or how the control is passed to the
kernels device manager for the keyboard.
So we have to do this.
We have to set the IP to the address
of the keyboard part of the device
manager to handle this shock.
So in another world we have
to put this address inside the
IP register of the processor.
Then the processor.
Next execution cycle,
execute the opcode of the
keyboard part of the kernel.
But who does this?
That's the main question.
Who does this setting?
In another word,
who Buddhist wrap the
keyboard part of the kernel?
Any question, any answer? Any idea?
The thing is, the kernel have
the control of the processor,
but the shock is received by the processor.
The processor is in the hand of the
kernel, but it receives a shock.
You are some kind of truth,
the Colonel. But how?
So we want to map between an electrical
signal from a device to a kernels
program or kernels address this address.
First of all, any electrical shock
from a device to this system,
basically to the processor
is called interrupt request.
You see, it means that I need to interrupt
the processor and take the attention.
So it is called IRQ or interrupt request.
And the program inside the kernel
that handles this shock is called
interrupt request handler.
So now we want to map between the IRQ by
a device to its handler inside the kernel.
This is done by a look up table.
This is standardized by all
manufacturers of the system and
basically it says that. If. A keyboard.
Is pressed key a key of
the keyboard is pressed?
The electrical shock should
represent the binary number 41.
Basically, it should represent
this electrical shock.
To the CPU, to the processor.
And based on this value.
The kernel or some part of the processor?
I'm not going to explain
the details knows that.
This device is has the handler
at this address of the kernel.
You can think of it as a mathematical
function on top of the IRQ, for instance, FX.
So you receive eggs and you apply
mathematical function on top of F.
It becomes an address, so if you receive one,
make it an address 10101 and this
is the address of the handler.
If you receive the IRQ, two basically
electrical shock for two which is 01.
So 01 is represent two map it to electric.
I mean to address by multiplying by
presence four, which becomes 801000.
So this is kind of a mapping
which is already fixed.
So you see here, for instance,
for a we don't have any mouse
here present for floppy device.
It's an old I think you don't
remember this type of device,
this is the interrupt request.
Basically,
if this device wants to take attention of
the processor in electrical shock is 6,
which is what is the binary value for six.
110 so it.
110110 it creates this electrical
shock and automatically it maps to this
address in the memory to handle the,
uh, this shock. So you see here
some of them are standardized.
You cannot change it.
All the computer system or all
around the world knows that if the
processor received the electrical
shock of the binary value 1.
It should map to an address and
this address is already determined
in the system to handle the shock.
So automatically the value of the IP
inside the processor is set to that address.
That's the way, actually the.
Handler actually is called within the kernel,
so it is automatic.
In a Unix environment you
there is a command called.
This one process interrupts.
You can see the list of these,
I mean the IRQ IRQ'S and also the address
of the hand lips as you can see here.
Some of them are zero,
meaning that these are not used.
There is no device attached to
the system to use these IRQ's.
If you build a new hardware
system and you want to you want
to recognize it to your system,
you have to create electrical shock that
represent one of these available IRQ's.
And then you have to add and handle
it to the kernel based on the
address that you want to be called.
And then when you attach
your system to the system,
your device to the system and you
press some key on this on that device.
It for instance generate the IRQ
by the electrical shock of instance
101101 something.
And the processor takes the IRQ
automatically change the IP to the
address of the handler and then the
control pad is passed to the carrier.
To that part of the kernel
that handles this device.
There's also another command process
info in the Unix environment.
Again, you can see the list of IRQ's.
This is for the keyboard standard keyboard.
I was looking for the mouse.
One of them let me see where is the mouse.
This is for instance for the USP.
Ah, this is for the Ethernet,
the network device.
We don't see any mouse here. Yeah, anyways,
and if you are in a Windows system,
this is the concept general to all
operating system, not only Unix.
If you if you are in the Windows system.
If you want to see the
irqs and the address is,
you go to the device manager,
change the view to the resource
by connection and this is their
list of the Irqs 03 and etc.
But one thing is that this is the
binary or hex value for the RQ number.
One thing is that in Windows you are not
able to see the address of the handler.
So now for instance you are not able
to see what part of the kernel at
what address of the memory handles.
For instance,
this device you only have the IRQ number.
Uh, and you can think of why
Windows is like this,
but Unix environment you can
see the address of the handler.
And that's it.
So basically by this look up table,
which is already fixed and also standardized.
When if press a key is pressed
on the keyboard.
The electrical shot goes to the processor.
The processor sets the IP.
To the address of the handler for that IRQ,
and then the.
I asked the IRQ handler inside.
The kernel knows that to what
program should pass the character,
for instance G.
Whether the focus was by this program,
so the the character G should go
to this program or whether the I
mean the focus was by this program,
so they should go to this program.
So one very interesting example would be
writing a program that does the hacking,
meaning that it's called key logger.
Assuming that you want to log the password
of users inside a computer laboratory,
you want to find the password of
all these students to their emails.
So if you want to do that,
you have to write a program that logs
all the keypresses on a keyboard.
So you have to either write a
program in an application level,
or a writer program in the system level.
In what level you write the
key logger or the hack today?
Intra because handler for the keystroke.
Any idea?
Michelle says our system level
Matthews says system level,
so let's see if you write a program.
Just in normal program,
as you write the Hello World program.
And you want to log the key presses.
As long as you your program is running
as the control of the processor,
the kernel let you know
what keys are pressed,
so you can simply write a C program
and log whatever key or press as
long as your program or executing
is executing inside the processor.
However, if suddenly another program
such as this program have the focus,
then the keystroke goes to this
program and you are not able to
log the keystrokes by this program.
So application level programming
doesn't do well for key logger
or hack today keystroke handler.
You have to write a program
in a system level.
Basically you have to write.
A program which is attached
to the part of the kernel.
Then when the kernel loads inside the memory,
your program as a part or as a hack of
the handler for keyboard is also loaded.
Add.
Whatever actually the key is pressed,
it goes the processor, the processor.
Direct to the keyboard handler inside
the kernel and you already put your
program in that specific address.
And now you catch all the keystrokes.
I mean,
uh.
Without any I mean notice of
what programs have the focus,
because anything goes through
your hand on it.
Another example would be a shutdown key.
For instance, you want to write a virus
that whenever the user presses a key,
process specific key on a keyboard,
for instance, whenever it presses the east,
suddenly the system shut down.
Again, if you write an application level.
It doesn't work.
You have to write the system level
because you want to shut down the system.
Without any attention to what
program is running, as long as the
user pressed that specifically,
you want to shut down the whole system.
So this is the whole process that
the kernel gets the control of the
whole processor and memory and then
provide service to the other programs.
But now the next task is how the?
Are there programs that we ride?
Is Buddhist trapped inside the memory?
How we put the programs inside
the memory and make it process?
We already said that this is done by
the process manager part of the kernel.
But now we want to see how
this happens exactly.
So I think we have just five or six minutes.
So that's the reason that I put this slide
in the first, uh, part of the lecture.
So this process of making the
program become a process is very
similar to this part of the.
Bible. The Genesis 27.
Basically when the Lord God a make
the man from the dust of the ground.
And breathe into the nostril and
the breath of life. So basically,
a man of the US becomes a living being.
Same procedure happens.
To give a live to a debt program.
So that's why we I use this
scene of the Pulp Fiction.
So now we want to see how we can give
this breath of life to a program.
So basically when you write a
C program in editor such as VI,
you are going to do this in the
first lab in the this week's lab.
And then you give it to the compiler.
You have the assembly lines and
then you give it to the assembly.
You have the opcode then.
This is the way that you compile
it in a Unix environment.
This is the compiler for the
seed to compile your program
and then you make it whole.
And execute, I mean we make it as an opcode.
And save it in a file hello and
then you have to run the hello,
but when you run the hello
inside Unix environment,
what actually happens behind the scenes?
So we have the opcode of the program.
Which is going to solve a real problem.
And we have the process manager as a
part of the kernel at this address.
Which basically.
Makes a program as a process.
Who? Put the address of the
process manager on the IP.
In order to give the control to
the kernel power at the process
manager part of the kernel such
that the program becomes a process.
Again, very similar to the
bootstrapping of the kernel bibio's,
very similar to the Buddhist wrapping
of the interpreters handler by the
electrical shock and the look up table.
Now we want to bootstrap the program.
So we have to find a way to put
this address inside the IP.
The program is not going to provide the
electrical shock because it's not the device,
it's just a written program inside the file.
How we can do this mapping?
There is no electrical shock and there's
no bias as a chip inside the main board.
So we have to do this task.
First of all, we have to look at our program.
Second, we have to call the
process manager of the kernel by
changing the address of the IP.
To direct to this part of the kernel.
And after the process manager
makes our program process.
Then we have to give the
control of the processor to the
first opcode of our program.
These are three main steps to run
the program by the processor.
So this is the birth or the main
task of something called shell.
So basically there is another program.
This is not by the manufacturer.
This is not the electrical shot.
This is another program.
Application level program written by other
programmers and acts as a dispatcher.
This program has the duty of setting the
address of the IP inside the processor.
2.2 The process manager of the
kernel by giving the program, and,
uh, let the process manager load
the program inside the memory and
change the IP of the processor.
Point to the first opcode of the program.
So we don't have enough time to
discuss this shell. Next lecture
I'm going to explain what is shell.
And how this shell helps to bootstrap
our normal program inside the memory.
So. That was today's lecture
I was hoping to go more,
but we don't have enough time now.
So thank you so much for your attendance
and if you have any question, I'm ready now.
And also right after I mean this lecture,
I'm going to be in the office.
Virtual office so we can come there
and ask your question there as well.
Also, don't forget about the labs.
I mean, the online lab starts
today so we can go to the labs.
And also have a look at the lab assignment.
I mean lab manual and lecture model.
Thank you all and.
So we have a has a question behavior.
I'm not able to understand why
we cannot write on application
level 4 that hacking part.
Oh that's back to the hacking part.
Yeah here. So in order to explain this.
Let me actually I can show it like this.
So assuming I have one
tab inside the Chrome OK.
Also, I have another tab here so
now we have two tabs. In a Chrome,
each tab has one process or one program.
So although we have one single program,
is a Chrome. But each time when you
create a tab it copied the whole
program and create a new process.
That's why you can have multiple
processes from just one single program.
So assuming you have two
program process right now,
the first step and the second time.
If the you change the focus to the first tab,
whatever you write.
The kernel passes the keystroke
to the to this program because
this program has the focus.
But the second program doesn't have the
keystrokes because it didn't have the focus,
so the kernel didn't pass the
keystroke to this program.
The focus was the here.
But if you change the focus and then
go to the second program process
and now if you start writing now,
the kernel passes accused her to your
program because to this program,
because this program is the focus.
So. In another word. Based on.
Which program have the focus or have
the processor control the kernel,
passes the keystroke to that program OK?
So,
but the keystroke hack is that
we want to key.
We want to log keystrokes
from any other programs.
We want to let me back here.
We want to log all these skills
to whether it is in this program
or in this program.
So it should be somewhere in kernel
that reaches all the keystrokes.
Uh,
without any attention to what
program it should pass is the
keystrokes makes sense,
Fabio?
Oh great. I might ask,
how does the processor even get
to the address of process manager?
Is it by the electrical shock?
Oh, that's the that's the task
that we are going to explain.
This is going to be by the
shell as I explained shell.
Kelly is an application level
program that acts as a dispatcher.
Actually, this program loaded with
the kernel inside the memory and then
it helps to call the process manager.
By changing the IP address, yeah.
Will expand late, I mean next lecture, yeah.
Based on the last week and also this week,
but mostly on the pace of the last week.
Papa Pass am I pronouncing
your name correctly path?
Yeah, the the part the lecture
centers are based on the last week,
most of them, but some of them
are based on this week. Yeah,
that's why you have the option to answer.
Only two of them.
I mean just based on your preference,
we can ask two of them.
Ryan as Arclabs mandatory to attend no.
It just for your health
to do your assignments.
So if you feel like it that you can do it,
the lab assignment by yourself,
there is no need for attention.
There are no.
There is no mandatory even for the lecture.
The lecture attendance, the lab attendance.
They are not mandatory.
If you think that, uh,
you can understand these
topics better somewhere else,
or by reading book, yeah, go ahead.
I'm saying it's not mandatory.
I mean even the labs, yeah?
Where can we find the lecture
assignments on Blackboard?
I already said.
I mean, let me go to the first slide.
Also I can show it now.
So for the for the lecture
assignment at this location.
And for the lab assignment at this location,
so let me show it right now.
So if you go to the lectures
and then to the second week.
You see there is an assignment here
and there is a PDF attached to it,
so you can open it and then
if you open it for you.
So here is the question.
You simply select two of them
and answer them and I said how
you have to upload your answers.
For the lab assignment,
you have to go to the labs.
Second week.
And this is the lab,
so you have.
There is a sample code for
you in order to help you.
Also there is a manual for that,
so here's the manual for the first lab.
How to connect VR VPN to the uh,
I mean to the schools machine how
to use the windows to connect,
how to write a simple program,
how to compile it,
and then here's your assignment.
You have to do this assignment
and then make it a zip file by
these file and send it to us.
Uh.
The Hagia asked if we have doubts
and our lab section or over.
Can we go to other lab sections?
Yes, for sure.
Yeah, uh, if you think that?
I mean yes. Even the on campus labs.
So if you couldn't attend your own
lab section that you couldn't attend,
you can go to other lab section
because these are online so.
But remember the person who is
responsible for your mark is.
The lab instructor that you already
registered in lab in that lab.
For instance,
if you registered in this section 51.
Although you may attend to section 53,
but if anything happens, or if you,
I mean want to review your Martin etc,
you have to communicate with the
lab instructor for the section 51.
So be careful about that.
So in terms of the attendance,
it's flexible,
but in terms of learning structure you
have to find in which lab you registered.
A cha Cha Chi I in the mantle and
explain in what format you have to
upload your answers. I I explain,
explain how to make a PDF file and etc.
Yes it should be on the PDF format.
So anything else, uh?
Any other questions?
So it seems there is no OK,
we have thank you too Haley.
You too have a great day.
YouTube Yahoo Grade 2. Uhm?
Other students are Nash da,
Farhan Harry Joshua Mohab Radoslav
Randy and Tommy if you don't mind.
Uh, I'm going to remove you from the class.
Then I can close the door
of the virtual class.
Thank you. Oh
you too Harry.